At A&M, man, no, if you belong to fraternity, I
remember back in there, this Preacher Durst that
became vice president of Brown and Root, he was a
fraternity man. And the summer vacation between
my freshman year and sophomore year, Preacher had
gotten a letter from Dr. Bazell. saying that they
were clamping down on student activities,
hazing, and fraternities. They knew
fraternities existed at A&M, but they didn't have
enough proof. But if they found out that a student
was a fraternity man, they were going to expel him.
That's right. So a preacher told me about it that
summer. He said, we've been sent this letter. And
if any of us belong to fraternities, when we go
back, if they find it out, we expect to be expelled.
Well, he wasn't expelled. But
my captain was a good officer. He's dead and gone.
But he was a good officer, a swell person. And so was
the major of the cavalry that year. My freshman
year, I cleaned up his room. Old Dusty Dodson from
Amarillo, Texas. And he was a good major. They were
all good men. I didn't know a single one that wasn't
an outstanding individual.
And as far as I was concerned, they did a lot of good
for Texas A&M. But we suspended those football
players. We suspended them until the second
semester, I believe, of the following year. Of
course, the second semester of that year was about
over, so they were allowed to finish that
semester. But they were not going to be allowed to
come back in until the second semester of the
following year. But they came back in in September
of that year. To play football. The chairman of the
board. And I don't know who else. And now you
suspect. And here was another name that was read
off, too. And he was, well, anyhow.
The ex-students association of Texas A&M. I just
wondered, too, how long they were operating under
the TTs. That's just my idea. I know that one of the
executive directors was T.T.
Whether his followers were or not, I wouldn't
know. I care less. It really doesn't matter
because, as I said, they were all good men. And
whatever they did, they did it for A&M, and I don't
believe you could have gotten a truer Aggie
anywhere than those fellows. Now, we've talked
about a lot of changes in vet medicine from the
1930s to the 1960s. There must have been something
that I've missed that we should talk about. Do you
have any ideas about that? I mean, I'm certainly no
expert in veterinary science, that's for sure.
No, the big thing is that we have improved. And I
think now that the College of Veterinary Medicine
at A&M is an outstanding institution, I think it is
head and shoulders. Well, there is no comparison
now to what we were in the 30s. We were nothing in the
30s. Absolutely. And how we ever got the board of
directors to put on a big building program for us In
1931, when we had but one graduate in 1930, must
have been politics. Here they built it where civil
engineering is now. All of that sprang up. And
before that, we just had some shacks. We had
Francis Hall, of course, but it was terribly run
down and nothing in it except in physiology and
pharmacology. Nothing. But we've spread out all
over creation now and have, I don't know, 150 men on
the staff, not to mention technical help galore.
They have three or four or five in veterinary
anatomy. When I was crying for all the years I was in
there for one person and didn't get that until 15
years later. No.
There's no comparison. As a final question, then,
I'd like to ask you to evaluate your own career.
I wouldn't know how to evaluate it. I work like a
fool, and that's about all I can say. But I'm proud
of what I did. I gave them something in both
departments to build on.
You were appreciated. When we were down and out,
then I was there in the breach. And we built from
there. And we certainly had nothing when I went in.
Well, were there things during your about 30 years
that you wanted? 35 years that you wanted to do,
which you just couldn't accomplish, not
necessarily because of your own self, but because
of other outside circumstances or other
shortcomings, especially in your own
department?
Well, I'd like to have built a department up to
where we could have had a big research program We
could have had 10 or 12 staff members and so on. But
the money wasn't there.
I don't know. To begin with, I was never too sold on a
person teaching and researching. I wasn't too
sold on that. I thought, if you're going to teach
what teach, and if you're going to research, do
that. give all of your time to one or the other.
Because as I could see it then, you needed all of the
time you had and more to prepare yourself for
teaching. To do all of the research, the reading in
research and so on, and keep up with your field,
that would leave very little time for any
research. You couldn't keep your mind, unless you
were given A third of your time where you had
nothing else to do but research. If you had to carry
research along with your teaching, one or the
other is going to suffer. I still think that. Or you
are like some of the professors I've had who were
doing research. They get you off on their research
project, and that's about all they know to talk
about.
Uh, you mean old pine tree so-and-so? Are you
talking about Dr. Old Pine Tree So-and-So? That's
about all he talked in his course on the pine tree
because he did his PhD on the life cycle of the pine.
I know what
you mean.
No, I'd like to have been two or three people. and I
can put one of them over in research and one of them
teaching and one of them reading up in research and
so on, work in the library, references over. You
just don't, you can't spread yourself out unless
you have an elaborate personnel. You're not gonna
do much in the way of research. If it's all up to you
and you have to teach too, you have nobody to help
you, you might as well forget your research. I
still feel that. Unless you have adequate help,
your research isn't going to be worth a
continental. Well, you won't be able to produce
anything in a lifetime.
As far as accomplishments, then, on your career,
could you sum that up for me? No, I'd have to be
satisfied with what I did, but I just didn't feel
that I did enough. I wasn't
physically capable or mentally either, I guess,
to do more. I did all I could for veterinary
medicine and that was it. And I think I've been
appreciated. I think my students appreciated me.
I think the wall in that room of yours demonstrates
that. Well, what I was after was turnout solid
veterinarians. I tell my students, you go out and
practice, and if you don't know any more about
diseases than the vocational ag teacher or the
county agent, you're not going to be worth your
salt. He can see from his eyes out. He can tell you
that that's hog collar or that's black legs. He
knows the signs. But can he think in terms of that
disease? What is happening in that animal's body?
What is happening within the cell? What can you do
to Stop this disease in that cell. What medicines
are you going to give? What is the interaction of
the medicine with the disease process? That's
something that your county agent and your
vocational ag man won't be able to solve. He knows
what he has. But what's taking place, and that's
what I want you to be capable of. I want you to be able
to take it down even to the chemistry or even into
the electron microscope, into the small
particles that are within the cytoplasm of the
cell or within the little particle that's in the
cytoplasm of the cell. I want you to be able to see
all the way through, not just from your nose out.
And unless you do, you're just a plain old quack.
That's it. And I did everything I could to get
anatomy over, especially microscopic anatomy.
The gross anatomy to me didn't matter very much.
But the microscopic did, because this is where
Everything works down in that cell. And I said,
unless you know your normal tissues, you're not
going to have a basis to build the abnormals on.
That's just like the little girl in histology in
medical school. When we finished the course in
histology, there were two or three abnormal
slides of lung tissue. She looked at those. Of
course, pathologic. She didn't know what she was
looking at. But she had completed a course in
normal cell study, histology. She should have
recognized lung and that there was something
wrong with it. She called the professor and said, I
don't know what's wrong with this lung. It's
labeled abnormal. It has holes in it, just like
that other lung I looked at. I thought,
you poor thing. If that is all that you have gotten
out of a course in histology, you may as well not
have taken it. It has holes in it. This was a section
of lung that showed chronic passive congestion.
The alveolar walls were three or four times as
thick as they normally should be. There was
emphysema. Some of the spaces were many times, 20
times the size that they should be, and those walls
were stretched thin. There were heart lesion
cells, phagocytic cells that had picked up blood
pigment in the alveolar spaces. She didn't see it.
This was lung because it had holes in it. And that's
all she had to build on in her pathology. And I said,
I surely would hate to be your pathology
instructor, because you have nothing to build on.
In my way of teaching histology, they had as much
pathology as they had histology. We showed them
the normal. And then we compared it with
abnormalities. I didn't have to name the
abnormality. If it was low bar pneumonia or
adenocarcinoma
of the liver or just a plain old cirrhosis of the
liver or pancreas or what are you, kidneys or what?
My training in pathology allowed me to show him the
normal and impress on him what that normal is. And
it had better be this way or else it's pathologic.
That's right. So that was my idea of teaching
histology. I wouldn't give you a dime for a pure
little course in histology. And I've told them
that over in biology. And they don't like me. They
don't like you because you don't like them. The old
boy we had here teaching pathology when I was in
anatomy, he didn't like it because I was carrying
them off into pathology and comparing the normal
and the abnormal. To me, that's the way I wanted to
be taught. And that's the way I taught. I taught it
as I wanted to be taught, but was not. That's the
only way you're going to get it. When you have
somebody who's dedicated enough and is educated
enough in that field, and he should be, if he's
going to teach it, he should spend every waking
hour improving himself in his field. You're in
history, and unless you stay with it and you burn
your midnight oil and keep up with it and delve into
it, you won't amount to a pinch either. And unless
you want to give it to your students, you're
interested enough in them to want to give them
everything that you can. You don't have time for
research. You have to give them what is known at the
present time.
And I mean, it had better be. I don't have any
meetings. In anatomy, American Association of
American Veterinary Anatomists. And the last one
I attended, here's an old boy from Colorado. He
loves to draw. So in histology, what do they do?
They draw pictures they're looking at in the
microscope. Beautiful pictures of whatever
organ it happens to be. I said, well, when I was down
in Galveston in 1950, they required me to take
their freshman course in histology, which was, to
me, a laugh. Because I'd taught this stuff for 30
years. And I'd had all the pathology. And they
weren't telling me anything about histology. But
we had to draw. Because Dr. Pomerant was the
instructor in histology. And he is an artist. in
his own right, as well as an architect. He was an
architect. He was an artist. He had his PhD in
science and tissue culture work. Dr. Pomerant,
he's dead now. But he wanted us to make drawings.
And I said, I don't know how many hours I've spent
just stippling. I said, what do you learn when you
stipple? What do you learn when you spend all this
time drawing? I said, now, if that's all I have to
teach in histology, I am not teaching. I want to
keep that student so busy looking at tissues he
doesn't have time to draw, and I'm teaching him to
recognize the normal. And I'm comparing it with
all kinds of abnormalities that I can find in that
organ. He's seen the whole work. My kid said, Dr.
John, I learned more pathology in your class than I
did when I went to pathology. I said, but you knew
the normal. Absolutely. You know what's normal.
So that's the way. But you don't have time for a lot
of research.
Well, I'm glad that we can end this interview on
such a strong note.
Well, I'll feel like that to my dying day.
Unless an instructor is heart and soul in it, and he
has the student, in the proper perspective this
youngster has to get everything that i can put
between his ears everything i'm not going to
slight him in any way unless he has that attitude he
better not be in teaching we have too damn many
graduate students now who are working in there and
all they want their degree and get gone and you have
more complaints about students they have a
graduate assistant teaching a major course they
may be a foreigner and they can't understand him
half he says that anyhow we've had those
complaints well thank you very much This ends the
interview with Dr. John Miller. Well, Terry, I
don't know where you are. Appreciate it.